Title: LAVA: Logic-Aware Validation and Augmentation Framework for Large-Scale Financial Document Auditing

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.16763v1

Published Time: Tue, 18 Aug 2026 02:20:51 GMT

Number of Pages: 18

Markdown Content:
# LAVA: Logic-Aware Validation and Augmentation Framework for Large-Scale Financial Document Auditing 

Ruoqi Shu *† , Xuhui Wang *† , Isaac Wang ‡, Yanming Mai, Bo Wan 

BMO Financial Group 

{ruoqi.shu, xuhuieric.wang}@bmo.com ,

{isaac.wang, yanming.mai, bo.wan}@bmo.com 

Abstract 

Financial document validation in production— such as payroll auditing, tax compliance, and loan underwriting—demands exceptional ac-curacy, consistency, and reproducibility un-der strict enterprise constraints. In prac-tice, documents arrive with heterogeneous lay-outs and formats, semantically rich, context-dependent content, and embedded business rules that current pipelines struggle to pro-cess reliably. We introduce LAVA (Logic-Aware Validation and Augmentation)—a mod-ular, backbone-agnostic pipeline built on multi-modal large language models—that integrates a four-stage design: document–rule retrieval, layout-preserving information extraction, aux-iliary metadata enrichment, and auditable sym-bolic/arithmetic verification. LAVA supports robust rule grounding, fine-grained error attri-bution, and consistent, traceable end-to-end ex-ecution—capabilities essential for high-stakes deployment. Evaluated on a large real-world benchmark with diverse financial documents and dozens of expert-curated validation rules, LAVA outperforms baselines in hallucination control and edge-case handling while maintain-ing efficient token usage, demonstrating practi-cality for high-volume, time-critical validation. 

1 Introduction 

Regulatory penalties, financial losses, and repu-tational damage can all result from a single er-ror in financial document validation, making accu-racy, consistency, and auditability non-negotiable. Financial institutions process millions of docu-ments daily across workflows such as loan un-derwriting, payroll auditing, tax compliance, and fraud detection. The challenge is acute for semi-structured documents like statements, invoices, and tax slips, which span multiple pages, exhibit irregu-lar layouts, encode domain-specific business logic, 

> *Equal contribution.
> †Corresponding author.
> ‡Work done during an internship at BMO Financial Group.

and often arrive as noisy scans or non-standard PDFs (Bhattacharyya et al., 2025; Ding et al., 2024a; Xu et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2024). Recent years have witnessed rapid progress in vi-sually rich document understanding through layout-and structure-aware pretraining of multimodal large language models (MLLMs). LayoutLM (Xu et al., 2020) pioneered spatial–textual joint encod-ing, followed by DocFormer (Appalaraju et al., 2021), DocLLM (Wang et al., 2024), mPLUG-DocOwl2 (Hu et al., 2025), and ROP (Zhang et al., 2024), advancing multimodal architectures for structural representation. This shift moves beyond pure text modelling to multimodal docu-ment intelligence. However, evaluations remain dominated by perceptual and question answering (QA) tasks, probing reasoning in a narrow, task-specific manner while rarely accessing validation— reasoning that tests both interpretation and reliabil-ity under structured and cross-field constraints. Enterprise-grade document validation presents requirements beyond those of perception or rea-soning alone. It calls for symbolic rule enforce-ment, cross-field consistency, and multi-step logi-cal coherence—capabilities only partially reflected in existing benchmarks (Wang et al., 2023b; Li et al., 2025; Borchmann et al., 2021). Recent datasets have expanded evaluation to layout-aware perception and understanding (Zhu et al., 2024; Wu et al., 2023; Mathew et al., 2021; Stanisławek et al., 2021; Šimsa et al., 2023), but compliance-critical validation logic remains underexplored. In practice, enterprises often patch the gap by pairing general-purpose models with rigid rule-based mod-ules (Shende et al., 2024). Yet even state-of-the-art models that excel at extraction or understanding exhibit ongoing limitations when directly applied to validation: hallucinations remain common, and reasoning traceability is limited. Adaptation across regulatory schemas is fragile, and computational costs escalate with token usage at enterprise scale. arXiv:2608.16763v1 [cs.AI] 17 Aug 2026 These shortcomings make validation not merely an extension but a distinct and emerging frontier of document intelligence—one that demands frame-works where accuracy, efficiency, audit readiness, and robustness are central requirements. 

Our Work. To address these challenges, we present LAVA (Logic-Aware Validation and 

Augmentation), a modular and efficient frame-work for verifiable reasoning over semi-structured, layout-complex financial documents, designed for real-world applicability, fine-grained error attri-bution, and rapid adaptation and reproducibility across structurally similar collections. Agnostic to backbone models, LAVA extends beyond static benchmarks by integrating (i) layout-informed knowledge extraction preserving structural cues, (ii) domain-aware augmentation with contextual metadata, and (iii) arithmetic and symbolic verifica-tion ensuring factual alignment with business rules, orchestrated in a four-stage system of retrieval, ex-traction, augmentation, and hybrid reasoning. We evaluate LAVA on a real-world large-scale industrial benchmark with validation rules curated by senior industry experts reflecting real regulatory conditions. Results show competitive gains in fac-tual accuracy and symbolic correctness, together with lower computational overhead than baseline MLLM pipelines, demonstrating robustness and cost-effectiveness in realistic financial validation scenarios. Our main contributions are: • Task and System. We formalize financial document validation as a multi-document rea-soning task—largely absent in existing bench-marks—and instantiate it in LAVA , a novel modular framework designed for accurate and auditable validation of semi-structured finan-cial documents. • Reasoning Strategy & Auditability. We de-sign a controllable hybrid reasoning frame-work unifying factual/contextual templates with symbolic and arithmetic tasks via explicit formula generation, with an external checker fallback ensuring correctness, thereby enhanc-ing accuracy, interpretability, and operational robustness. • Evaluation. We propose a comprehensive evaluation framework covering symbolic cor-rectness, factual alignment, and hallucination control for fine-grained reasoning assessment in realistic validation workflows. 

2 Related Work 

Visually Rich Document Understanding. Re-cent work has shifted from extraction pipelines to-ward LLM-centric modeling that integrates layout and visual cues. DocLayLLM (Liao et al., 2025) adds visual patches and 2D positional tokens, Vis-DoM (Suri et al., 2025) combines multimodal re-trieval with consistency constraints, 3MVRD (Ding et al., 2024b) aligns fine- and coarse-grained signals via multi-task distillation, and Layout-LLM (Fujitake, 2024) applies instruction tuning for unified document tasks. These advances im-prove representation and generalization; our work is complementary, focusing on auditable valida-tion —explicit symbolic checks, cross-field consis-tency, and reproducible reasoning traces required in compliance-critical workflows. Our framework is model-agnostic, plugging into any MLLM back-bone to introduce validation as a controllable layer. 

Layout-Guided Document Encoding. Back-bones such as LayoutLMv3 (Huang et al., 2022), FormNet (Lee et al., 2022, 2023), and Doc-Former (Appalaraju et al., 2021) combine textual, spatial, and visual cues through large-scale pre-training. These excel at form-style entity extraction but remain embedding-level and not optimized for symbolic validation. In contrast, our framework leverages layout-derived structures to enable mod-ular business rule checks and reproducible logic tracing, addressing auditability without massive training effort. 

LLM Verification and Rule-based Valida-tion. Progress in LLM factuality—via self-checking (Dhuliawala et al., 2024), retrieval-augmented prompting (Qin et al., 2025), symbolic grounding (Hennigen et al., 2024), and rectifica-tion (Kang et al., 2024)—has improved reliabil-ity in clean text and formal reasoning (Liu et al., 2025). Yet these methods falter on noisy, hetero-geneous documents with long-range dependencies and embedded business rules. Traditional rule en-gines (e.g., Drools) provide transparency but fail under layout variation, while hybrid LLM–rule or knowledge graph systems (Vertsel and Rumi-antsau, 2024; Sadowski and Chudziak, 2025) trade flexibility for interpretability. Our framework in-stead couples symbolic verification with layout-Knowledge Extraction                

> ①Structured Modality Conversion
> ②Content Filtering
> Document S et
> Validation Intent
> Symbolic Reasoner
> Arithmetic Processor
> Branching given validation type
> Validation Results
> and Reasons
> Bidirectional constraint exchange Metadata & terminology
> Validation Retrieval
> ①Intent Parsing
> ②Rules Filtering
> Info Augmentation
> ①Validation Type Classification
> ②Metadata Injection
> ③Glossary Enrichment
> Document Retrieval
> ①Document Pre-processing
> ②Document C lassification
> ③Document Filtering

Figure 1: Overview of LAVA. The architecture comprises two parallel pipelines—document processing and rule grounding—interacting via bidirectional constraints (solid arrows: main data flow; dashed arrows: auxiliary exchange). The document-processing track performs retrieval, extraction, and augmentation to produce layout-preserving structured content with enriched metadata. The rule-grounding track retrieves, classifies, and dispatches applicable validation rules to either the Symbolic Reasoner or Arithmetic Processor, depending on reasoning type. 

and metadata-informed prompting, merging rule transparency with neural adaptability, making it fit for compliance-critical validation. 

3 Method 

Problem Formalization. We define financial document validation as a human-in-the-loop copi-lot task, where the system assists users (e.g., un-derwriters, compliance officers, fraud analysts) in verifying whether a set of financial documents (e.g., from a mortgage application) satisfies certain busi-ness rules under real-world conditions of layout complexity, domain-specific logic, and noisy input. 

Inputs. The system takes as input: (1) a docu-ment set D = {d1, . . . , d N } in scanned PDF or image format, where each di is a semi-structured financial document (e.g., bank statement, tax form), and (2) a validation intent q, a user-specified veri-fication goal in natural language (e.g., Does gross income exceed loan threshold?). 

Objective. The system maps (q, D) to a set of validation outputs V = {vk}, where each vk in-cludes: a subset of supporting documents Dk ⊆ D ,a set of retrieved business rules Rk ⊆ R from a 

predefined rule library, a binary verification label 

yk ∈ { Pass , Fail }, and an explanation trace ek

for auditability. This formulation supports multi-document, logic-grounded reasoning while ensur-ing modular, interpretable validation aligned with enterprise workflows. 

Architecture. Figure 1 illustrate LAVA architec-ture, which employs a modular design paradigm to address the complexity of enterprise-grade pro-duction systems. Although this design involves the integration of multiple components, it yields critical advantages for deployment. Decoupling the workflow isolates potential points of failure within individual modules, enabling targeted and independent validation and thereby systematically reducing the long-term verification cost and over-all operational overhead. Furthermore, the ability to debug, update, or replace modules without sys-temic disruption enhances maintainability—a stark contrast to the challenges of managing opaque, end-to-end models. This design philosophy is therefore foundational to building a robust, auditable, and scalable system fit for the rigors of real-world fi-nancial validation. 

3.1 Document and Validation Retrieval 

We jointly describe the first two modules, as they operate in a tightly coupled fashion to determine relevant document-rule pairs for downstream ex-traction. Given a user-specified validation intent q

and a document set D = {d1, . . . , d N }, the mod-ules select a subset Dv ⊆ D that is temporally valid and relevant to the task, along with a set of ex-ecutable business rules Rv = {r1, . . . , r M }. Both subsets are tailored to the verification goal through a bidirectional constraint mechanism, ensuring only applicable document-rule pairs are forwarded for knowledge extraction and augmentation. 

Document Retrieval. Documents are first pre-processed to normalize layout and correct visual ar-tifacts (e.g., OCR errors, rotation, skew) (Boudraa et al., 2020), preserving alignment and structural fi-delity for downstream modules. Each document di

is then classified into a predefined document type using a lightweight image-based classifier such as TinyViT (Wu et al., 2022), as financial documents of the same type generally share consistent page-level features. Recognized types are forwarded to Validation Retrieval to constrain rule applicability. Document-level metadata (e.g., date, coverage period) is extracted using a template-guided NER pipeline with regex patterns and rule-based heuris-tics. Temporal constraints parsed from the val-idation intent in the next module (e.g., “past 3 months”) are applied to filter out documents out-side the relevant time window. In addition, applica-ble document types extracted from retrieved rules in Validation Retrieval are passed back to further prune documents irrelevant to all candidate rules. 

Validation Retrieval. Given q, this module re-trieves a subset of rules Rv from the predefined library R, based on semantic relevance and docu-ment compatibility. The rule library is enriched with metadata specifying applicable document types. Lightweight LLMs can parse q to extract temporal constraints, while a sentence encoder (e.g., Sentence-BERT (Reimers and Gurevych, 2019)) encodes q to retrieve top-K semantically relevant rules. Retrieved rules are then filtered using document-type constraints from Document Retrieval, and their own document-type metadata is fed back to further refine Dv.In conclusion, temporal and semantic cues from 

q filter the document set, while recognized doc-ument types and rule metadata eliminate inappli-cable rules. This closed-loop filtering minimizes irrelevant candidates on both sides, reduces reason-ing load, and improves accuracy without sacrificing interpretability, ensuring downstream processing operates on the most relevant and valid document-rule pairs. 

3.2 Knowledge Extraction 

This module transforms each filtered document 

di ∈ D v into a compact, layout-aware hybrid repre-sentation for downstream reasoning. Instead of flat key–value pairs, we produce a structured markup that encodes page layout, visual grouping, and field dependencies, serving as a bridge between scanned formats and language-model-friendly input. 

Structured Modality Conversion. To capture the rich visual and semi-structural semantics of financial documents, we adopt an HTML-like markup constructed from parsed layout and OCR signals. Prior work shows that retaining tabu-lar alignments, hierarchical sections, and field groupings improves reasoning fidelity (Sui et al., 2024), but raw markup is insufficient for noisy scans. We therefore augment it with: (1) structural parsing via document analysis tools (e.g., Layout-Parser (Shen et al., 2021), LayoutLMv3 (Huang et al., 2022)), AWS Textract; (2) OCR-based re-covery (e.g., Tesseract OCR (Smith, 2007)) for free-form or scattered content, including recon-struction of long paragraphs into coherent spans; (3) proximity-based grouping to merge fragmented tokens into coherent semantic units; and (4) vi-sual region preservation for inherently non-textual content (e.g., charts, stamps, signatures), where candidate regions are identified from layout cues (e.g., low text coverage or OCR confidence) and retained as image patches for the MLLM input. 

Content Filtering. The extracted representation often contains much noise from headers, footers, boilerplate blocks, or placeholders. We prune such elements using DOM structure, field labels (e.g., Name , Address ), and positional cues, reduc-ing token usage while improving attention focus for model prompts. By combining structure-preserving markup, se-mantic recovery, selective visual preservation, and noise reduction, this module delivers a high-fidelity hybrid form that maintains interpretability while enabling reliable downstream reasoning. 

3.3 Information Augmentation 

This module enriches downstream reasoning by injecting auxiliary signals from both documents and retrieved rules. It serves two purposes: routing rules to the appropriate verification pathway and augmenting prompts with rich metadata to improve model understanding. Each rule rk ∈ R v is classified as symbolic (context-dependent logic) or arithmetic (numeric computation) via a lightweight LLM query, avoid-ing brittle heuristics. In parallel, metadata is ad-ditionally extracted from layout-preserving out-puts: language (via token-based detection), doc-ument types (from retrieval module), and domain-specific terms (e.g., withholding or CPP 1) detected through lexical and structural heuristics targeting low-frequency tokens, abbreviations, and left-hand-side predicates in field labels or rule expressions. This metadata is distilled into concise semantic clar-ifications for interpretability and disambiguation. The resulting signals are incorporated into prompt headers or reference blocks, sharpening alignment    

> 1CPP refers to the Canada Pension Plan, a mandatory pension contribution in Canadian payroll systems. Generate Formula
> LLM checker fallback loop (max nretries)
> External Evaluator
> Formula Result
> PASS
> FAIL
> Rule

Figure 2: Arithmetic Processor. Given a validation rule, the system generates a formula and delegates evaluation to an external calculator. A checker LLM validates alignment between the rule and result. Failures trigger a fallback loop with negative feedback. 

with rule semantics and improving precision in complex validation scenarios, while keeping the verification loop efficient. 

3.4 Validation 

To support diverse verification needs and enhance the reliability, we adopt a bifurcated framework with two sub-modules: Arithmetic Processor for numerical tasks (e.g., verifying tax deductions, cal-culating gross revenue), and Symbolic Reasoner 

for all other general rules requiring semantic and contextual reasoning. 

Arithmetic Processor. As illustrated in Figure 2, when rules involving arithmetic or numerical com-putation are routed to this sub-module, instead of relying on LLMs for direct computation—prone to hallucinations and numeric instability, we adopt a tool-use paradigm where the model is used solely for generating a task-specific formula, which is then executed by a deterministic external engine such as a Python interpreter (Gao et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2022). To ensure alignment between the for-mula and the validation semantics, we introduce a fallback auditing loop: the rule and generated for-mula are reviewed by a secondary LLM "checker". If a mismatch is detected, the formula is regener-ated, conditioned on the previous (incorrect) ver-sion as a negative example. This loop improves robustness by systematically detecting and correct-ing errors, mitigating hallucinated computations and flawed reasoning pathways. 

Symbolic Reasoner. This sub-module handles semantic or structural reasoning. In contrast to Arithmetic Processor, it directly delegates rules to a general-purpose model, as such reasoning falls within the model’s inherent strengths. This design choice reduces integration overhead and inference latency, while remaining sufficient for a wide range of non-arithmetic verification scenarios. 

Prompt Excerpt for Symbolic Reasoner                      

> Excerpt: only key parts are shown below, simplified for illustration.
> You are an assistant verifying {document_types} documents (in
> {languages} ), with extracted {knowledge_names} ...
> Instructions:
> 1. Use {structured_representation} as references for identify-ing the layout... 2. Use {semantic_fields} as references for explicit context... ... n. Output as follows: •Only output the fields requested in the validation rule... •Format: empty = ""; date = YYYYMMDD...
> Example: {example_output}
> Task Input:
> {validation_rule}
> •{term_1} :{definition_1} , ..., {term_n} :{definition_n}
> Output: Return JSON only. No explanation or preamble...

Figure 3: Prompt excerpt for Symbolic Reasoner, dy-namically built from the retrieved validation rule, ex-tracted knowledge, and augmentation components. Full versions for both Arithmetic Processor and Symbolic Reasoner are provided in Appendix A.1.1 and A.1.2. 

Prompts. We adopt our prompt construction strategy in meta-prompting fashion (Zhang et al., 2023) that presents task-relevant information in a step-wise and zero-shot format rather than re-lying on illustrative examples. Unlike chain-of-thought (Wei et al., 2022), few-shot prompt-ing (Brown et al., 2020), or self-consistency (Wang et al., 2023a), our approach avoids brittle curated examples, which struggle to generalize across het-erogeneous financial documents (Zhou et al., 2023), and removes high inference cost of example-heavy prompting. To ensure verification prompts are precisely tai-lored to both the rules and associated documents, we implement a dynamic, template-based prompt construction system. It integrates supplemental in-formation from upstream modules with the rule to populate flexible prompt templates. By lever-aging templating libraries like Jinja, we employ programmatic, code-like logic to govern the inclu-sion and granularity of metadata based on both document layout and task semantics. As illustrated in Figure 3, this mechanism produces prompts that are maximally informative while remaining token-efficient and robust to both arithmetic and symbolic reasoning tasks. By structuring all inputs accord-ing to rule logic, metadata, and knowledge, our approach generalizes well across heterogeneous fi-nancial documents. The resulting system remains accurate, cost-efficient and context-aware, support-ing scalable and reliable verification tasks. 

4 Experiments 

We evaluate LAVA on real-world Canadian mort-gage application documents sampled from a propri-etary database to assess the system within a consis-tent validation scenario. The set includes multiple document types and around 1,000 scanned PDFs or images—such as tax forms, bank/investment state-ments, and legal agreements—selected for their semi-structured formats, diverse layouts, and rich logical dependencies (see A.4). This focused yet heterogeneous domain enables rigorous testing of LAVA’s ability to produce accurate outputs and avoid false positives, particularly where heuristic, zero-shot, and few-shot LLM-based methods strug-gle with layout variability or reasoning complexity. To ensure rigorous and interpretable evaluation, we adopt rule-level testing rather than intent-level, with validation rules drawn from a curated library provided by business stakeholders. Each rule cor-responds to an atomic validation unit and is ap-plied only to the document types for which it is defined. For fairness and comparability, document type metadata is included with the dataset, since accurate validation cannot be assessed without first matching each document to its correct rule set; this ensures that all pipelines are evaluated under the same conditions, without document and validation retrieval. Ground-truth outcomes are manually an-notated by domain experts, and automatic evalua-tion is complemented by manual audits from busi-ness collaborators, ensuring both accuracy and in-stitutional credibility in line with production-grade expectations for document validation. 

4.1 Implementations 

To ensure fairness, all baselines, LAVA, and LAVA’s ablation variants use Claude 3.7 Son-net (Anthropic, 2024) as the validation compo-nent. We configure the model with a maximum re-sponse length of 5120 tokens and enable reasoning (thinking) with a budget of 1024 tokens, allowing the model to better understand complex validation rules and generalize across documents with diverse layouts and edge scenarios. For LAVA’s Arithmetic Processor, the maximum retry number n in the fall-back loop is set to 2, to ensure a practical trade-off between error correction and computational effi-ciency. And all other LLM parameters are kept identical across evaluations. For document analysis in experiments, we prior-itized a methodology that ensures our findings are portable, reproducible, and immediately accessible. To this end, our experiment exclusively utilizes off-the-shelf tools that do not require custom train-ing or dataset-specific fine-tuning. A foundational layer of raw text and spatial information was es-tablished for the experiment using the open-source Tesseract OCR (Smith, 2007). For the processing of structural semantics, such as tables and forms, the publicly available AWS Textract service was employed. This consistent and transparent tooling strategy not only ensures that the comparative eval-uation in Sections 4.4 and 4.5 fairly assesses the core architectural and reasoning capabilities of the different pipelines, but also directly supports other researchers to easily replicate and build upon our results. 

4.2 Validation Rules 

We group several dozen validation rules into five categories, reflecting distinct reasoning and com-putation demands. These categories assess the pipeline’s ability to extract information, integrate rules, and perform contextual reasoning. See A.2 for complete versions of some representative rules. 

4.3 Evaluation Metrics 

Our evaluation metrics comprehensively assess rea-soning quality across all pipeline stages. Given the distinct characteristics of our compliance-sensitive validation task compared to common document understanding settings, we design task-specific metrics with particular emphasis on suppressing false positives—a critical industrial concern caus-ing costly investigations, delays, and loss of trust. We evaluate baselines from three perspectives to cover these aspects. Their formal definitions are given in Appendix A.3, along with visual examples showing how each metric manifests in an illustra-tive sample document. 

Hallucination Control. We report the percent-age of responses with two failure types: Metric Rule Group VLM + Field-Level OCR LLM + Field-Level OCR LLM + Enhanced OCR LAVA                                                                     

> Factual C10.03 0.03 0.01 0.01
> Hallucination C20.08 0.10 0.04 0.03
> Rate C30.31 0.33 0.30 0.18
> C40.05 0.08 0.05 0.03
> C50.28 0.30 0.15 0.05
> Numerical C1N/A N/A N/A N/A
> Infidelity C20.08 0.04 0.03 0.01
> Rate C30.33 0.31 0.20 0.10
> C40.11 0.08 0.05 0.00
> C50.25 0.10 0.10 0.00
> Edge Case C1N/A N/A N/A N/A
> Error Rate C20.27 0.25 0.23 0.02
> C30.86 0.90 0.82 0.17
> C40.46 0.34 0.43 0.11
> C50.89 0.92 0.86 0.08

Table 1: Performance of baselines across three metrics and five validation rule categories ( C1–C5). C1: content ex-traction; C2: conditional logic reasoning; C3: multi-step logic reasoning; C4: unconstrained arithmetic consistency checking; C5: constrained arithmetic consistency checking. 

• Factual Hallucination Rate: Content not grounded in the source document, such as fab-ricated values or formulas, and unsupported claims. • Numerical Infidelity Rate: Incorrect quanti-tative reasoning or numerical derivations, such as incorrect formula execution results and con-clusions inconsistent with the given numerical evidence. 

Edge Case Handling. This metric measures fail-ure rate on complex or exception-driven scenar-ios, about 10%–25% of document–rule pairs. Such cases require adaptive logic reasoning beyond fixed rules and broader logic coverage for diverse edge conditions. As these challenges often overlap, we report a single rate to capture both, where higher values indicate weaker generalization and reason-ing flexibility. 

Token Cost. We measure input and output to-kens per rule check to assess computational effi-ciency and deployment cost, highlighting trade-offs between reasoning quality and efficiency across pipelines. For each document-rule pair, token counts are recorded and aggregated over the full evaluation set. 

4.4 Comparative Baselines 

Here, Field-Level OCR denotes OCR output con-taining only individual field texts and their spatial information (e.g., from bounding boxes), without higher-level structure such as tables, sections, or relational links between fields. This representation preserves raw layout signals but omits the struc-tured markup used in LAVA’s pipeline. We consider three representative settings: • VLM + Field-Level OCR: Document images with Field-Level OCR in a VQA setup, where OCR text aids visual grounding. • LLM + Field-Level OCR: Same OCR con-tent without images, measuring performance from textual–spatial data alone in a QA setup. • LLM + Enhanced OCR (no structural markup): OCR refined with domain-specific cleanup and recovery steps identical to LAVA’s extraction, but without structured markup, isolating LAVA’s impact of structured representation and modular reasoning. Since OCR and markup information might intro-duce noise (e.g., when text is misrecognized), we also examine an OCR-free configuration to assess the impact of textual knowledge. This setting is evaluated in ablation study (Section 4.5), where all other modules are preserved but the model oper-ates only on document images. It is excluded from the baseline set because the baselines are intended to preserve textual content in some form for fair comparison, whereas this variant probes the lim-its of visual-only reasoning and represents a more extreme ablation of the pipeline. As shown in Table 1, LAVA achieves the lowest failure rates across all metrics and categories, with especially large gains in multi-step logic reasoning (C3) and constrained arithmetic consistency check-ing ( C5), reducing hallucination and numerical er-rors by over 10% compared to the best baseline. And it records approximately 0% Numerical Infi-delity Rate in three of four categories. LAVA also substantially lowers edge case errors, indicating strong generalization under layout ambiguity and rare conditions. Common VQA and QA settings represented by the baselines underperform in this compliance-oriented validation task due to their limited handling of layout variability and domain-specific rules. These results highlight the benefit of structured prompts and modular reasoning in suppressing unsupported content generation and enabling reliable multi-step, context-aware reason-ing over structural data. We also sampled a subset of DocVQA (Mathew et al., 2021) documents with five manually defined rules each, where LAVA also achieved strong per-formance, confirming that our framework readily transfers to public data. More importantly, real-world validation tasks—where both documents and rules are richer in semantics, context, and reasoning complexity—pose substantially greater challenges, where our approach proves particularly effective under industry-level conditions. 

4.5 Ablation Study 

To assess the contribution of each core module in LAVA, we performed an ablation study using a uni-fied metric: the percentage of responses that fail to exactly match the ground truth. This stricter measure was chosen because LAVA’s earlier evalu-ations achieved low error rates in category-specific metrics, so a single comprehensive indicator bet-ter reveals performance drops when modules are altered or removed. We evaluated six configurations: the full LAVA system; three Knowledge Extraction (KE) vari-ants; and versions without Info Augmentation (IA) 

or Arithmetic Processor (AP) . The KE variants progressively reduce structural detail and change input format: 1. Markdown KE replaces LAVA’s structured markup with Markdown-like fashion. 2. Plain-text KE flattens layout into text aligned to mimic visual spacing but without structural tags. 3. No KE omits textual knowledge entirely,                                     

> Pipeline C1C2C3C4C5
> LAVA w/o KE 0.03 0.65 0.67 0.09 0.66 LAVA w/ Plain-text KE 0.02 0.63 0.58 0.08 0.48 LAVA w/ Markdown KE 0.01 0.25 0.54 0.05 0.55 LAVA w/o IA 0.01 0.15 0.45 0.05 0.12 LAVA w/o AP 0.01 0.03 0.29 0.10 0.56
> LAVA 0.01 0.03 0.28 0.05 0.07
> Table 2: Percentage of responses failing to exactly match ground-truth answers across five rule categories.

prompting the model with original document images. This configuration serves as the OCR-free, vision-only benchmark we referred to in the baseline comparison (Section 4.4). This stepwise removal strips explicit layout and relational cues, forcing reliance on surface text or raw images. For AP ablation, AP is replaced by Symbolic Reasoner, removing explicit calcula-tion/result validation. The two Retrieval modules are not ablated since all experiments use a fixed rule set, making them independent of validation accuracy. The error patterns in table 2 shows that KE, IA, and AP play complementary roles, with KE being the most critical. Removing KE forces the model to rely almost entirely on visual reasoning, rais-ing C2, C3, and C5 failure rate to 0.65–0.67—over twice LAVA’s error in multi-step logic ( C3) and nearly tenfold in constrained arithmetic consistency checking ( C5) even with the validation module’s assistance. Two factors explain this: (1) Structural conversion: without KE’s structural format that preserves complex and nested layout, grouping, and field dependencies, multi-step logic and table reasoning lose explicit relational cues. Downgrad-ing to Markdown or plain text progressively strips away these signals, with Markdown underperform-ing plain text in C5 due to weaker preservation of columnar alignment in tables; (2) Content filtering: without KE’s filtering stage, noisy headers, footers, and irrelevant fields dilute attention and amplify hallucination risk. This gradient from fully struc-tured to none shows that noise suppression, explicit spatial and relational cues are essential for stable reasoning, especially in multi-field and arithmetic-heavy rules for financial document validation tasks. IA mainly impacts logical reasoning: removing it raises C3 error from 0.28 to 0.45, suggesting that metadata and domain cues help models resolve field semantics and linking conditions across steps. AP’s effect is computation-focused: removing it leaves C1–C3 unchanged but drives C4/C5 error C1 C2 C3 C4 C5 Rule Category 02000 4000 6000 8000 10000 12000 Token Size 

> VLM + Field-Level OCR Input VLM + Field-Level OCR Output LLM + Field-Level OCR Input LLM + Field-Level OCR Output LLM + Enhanced OCR Input LLM + Enhanced OCR Output LAVA Input LAVA Output

(a) LAVA and baselines. C1 C2 C3 C4 C5 Rule Category 02000 4000 6000 8000 10000 12000 14000 Token Size 

> LAVA w/o KE Input LAVA w/o KE Output LAVA w/ Plain-text KE Input LAVA w/ Plain-text KE Output LAVA w/ Markdown KE Input LAVA w/ Markdown KE Output LAVA w/o IA Input LAVA w/o IA Output LAVA w/o AP Input LAVA w/o AP Output LAVA Input LAVA Output

(b) LAVA and ablated variants. 

Figure 4: Average input and output token counts across five rule categories. 

to 0.10/0.56, reflecting the limits of unconstrained LLM reasoning in arithmetic tasks and the benefit of explicit calculation with fallback mechanism. Overall, the degradations are consistent with the design intent: KE supplies the structured substrate, IA enriches it with semantic context, and AP en-forces numerical fidelity, justifying LAVA’s func-tionally complementary and modular composition. 

4.6 Business Impact 

While Section 4.4 and 4.5 highlight LAVA’s tech-nical advantages in accuracy and robustness, real-world adoption also depends on its operational effi-ciency and cost-effectiveness. By consolidating to-ken usage, we can further assess how LAVA scales under realistic operational constraints, using token consumption as a proxy for latency and API expen-diture in high-volume production workflows. LAVA amortizes multi-step costs by extracting structured knowledge once and reusing it across rules. As shown in Figure 4a, this design cuts in-put tokens by 25%–45% versus VLM and LLM baselines with Field-Level OCR, lowering infer-ence costs and enabling faster turnaround for time-critical financial validation processes, while also achieving fewer errors (Table 1). Ablation results (Figure 4b) show that in non-computation tasks ( C1–C3), excluding variant w/o KE, LAVA adds minimal tokens with stable out-put length due to the predefined schema-based re-sponse format. For computation tasks ( C4–C5), the less faithful structural representation from plain-text and Markdown KE inflate inputs by causing more model output errors and retries in the valida-tion loop. Across all ablations, full LAVA adds un-der 3k tokens per rule ( ∼ $0 .009 with Claude 3.7 or 

∼ $0 .006 with GPT-4.1), an overhead outweighed by substantial gains in accuracy and reasoning sta-bility. This demonstrates that LAVA delivers a dual advantage: (1) immediate computational sav-ings from reduced token usage, and (2) long-term operational efficiency from its modular, auditable design. This combination suggests that LAVA’s architectural benefits outweigh the modular inte-gration complexity, making it a cost-effective and scalable choice for high-volume, time-critical real-world financial workflows. 

5 Conclusion 

We presented LAVA, a modular, interpretable and backbone- and domain-agnostic system for enterprise-grade financial document validation. Combining layout-preserving extraction, domain-aware augmentation, and symbolic and arithmetic verification, LAVA achieves high factual alignment and numerical reliability on a large real-world benchmark, with lower computational overhead than monolithic prompting. Evaluation with factual hallucination rate, numerical infidelity rate, and edge case handling shows that structured, multi-stage reasoning enables fine-grained error attribu-tion, stronger robustness in compliance-sensitive workflows, and transfer to structurally similar data. Looking ahead, we aim to handle noisier, less-structured documents and to learn rule generaliza-tion across formats and domains. 

6 Ethical Considerations 

This research was conducted using a proprietary dataset of financial documents, with all data fully anonymized and handled under strict institutional privacy protocols. We acknowledge the poten-tial risk of algorithmic bias in financial decision-making. LAVA’s design as an accurate, scalable and auditable system is a deliberate step to mitigate this risk by enhancing transparency and ensuring human accountability. Nevertheless, any produc-tion deployment would necessitate rigorous, ongo-ing audits for demographic bias to ensure fair and equitable outcomes. References 

Anthropic. 2024. Claude 3 model family. https: //www.anthropic.com/news/claude-3-family .Accessed: 2025-08-07. Srikar Appalaraju, Bhavan Jasani, Bhargava Urala Kota, Yusheng Xie, and R. Manmatha. 2021. Docformer: End-to-end transformer for document understanding. In 2021 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Com-puter Vision, ICCV 2021, Montreal, QC, Canada, October 10-17, 2021 , pages 973–983. IEEE. Aniket Bhattacharyya, Anurag Tripathi, Ujjal Das, Archan Karmakar, Amit Pathak, and Maneesh Gupta. 2025. Information extraction from visually rich doc-uments using LLM-based organization of documents into independent textual segments. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,pages 17241–17256, Vienna, Austria. Association for Computational Linguistics. Łukasz Borchmann, Michał Pietruszka, Tomasz Stanis-lawek, Dawid Jurkiewicz, Michał Turski, Karolina Szyndler, and Filip Grali´ nski. 2021. Due: End-to-end document understanding benchmark. In Thirty-fifth Conference on Neural Information Processing Sys-tems Datasets and Benchmarks Track (Round 2) .Omar Boudraa, Walid Khaled Hidouci, and Dominique Michelucci. 2020. Using skeleton and hough trans-form variant to correct skew in historical documents. 

Mathematics and computers in simulation , 167:389– 403. Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M. Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, and 12 others. 2020. Language models are few-shot learners. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33: Annual Confer-ence on Neural Information Processing Systems 2020, NeurIPS 2020, December 6-12, 2020, virtual .Wenhu Chen, Xueguang Ma, Xinyi Wang, and William W. Cohen. 2022. Program of thoughts prompting: Disentangling computation from reason-ing for numerical reasoning tasks. Yufan Chen, Jiaming Zhang, Kunyu Peng, Junwei Zheng, Ruiping Liu, Philip Torr, and Rainer Stiefel-hagen. 2024. Rodla: Benchmarking the robustness of document layout analysis models. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-nition, CVPR 2024, Seattle, WA, USA, June 16-22, 2024 , pages 15556–15566. IEEE. Shehzaad Dhuliawala, Mojtaba Komeili, Jing Xu, Roberta Raileanu, Xian Li, Asli Celikyilmaz, and Jason Weston. 2024. Chain-of-verification reduces hallucination in large language models. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2024 , pages 3563–3578, Bangkok, Thailand. Association for Computational Linguistics. Yihao Ding, Jean Lee, and Soyeon Caren Han. 2024a. Deep learning based visually rich document con-tent understanding: A survey. ArXiv preprint ,abs/2408.01287. Yihao Ding, Lorenzo Vaiani, Caren Han, Jean Lee, Paolo Garza, Josiah Poon, and Luca Cagliero. 2024b. 3MVRD: Multimodal multi-task multi-teacher visually-rich form document understanding. In Findings of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics: ACL 2024 , pages 15233–15244, Bangkok, Thailand. Association for Computational Linguistics. Masato Fujitake. 2024. LayoutLLM: Large language model instruction tuning for visually rich document understanding. In Proceedings of the 2024 Joint International Conference on Computational Linguis-tics, Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC-COLING 2024) , pages 10219–10224, Torino, Italia. ELRA and ICCL. Luyu Gao, Aman Madaan, Shuyan Zhou, Uri Alon, Pengfei Liu, Yiming Yang, Jamie Callan, and Gra-ham Neubig. 2023. PAL: program-aided language models. In International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2023, 23-29 July 2023, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA , volume 202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 10764–10799. PMLR. Lucas Torroba Hennigen, Shannon Shen, Aniruddha Nrusimha, Bernhard Gapp, David Sontag, and Yoon Kim. 2024. Towards verifiable text generation with symbolic references. Preprint , arXiv:2311.09188. Anwen Hu, Haiyang Xu, Liang Zhang, Jiabo Ye, Ming Yan, Ji Zhang, Qin Jin, Fei Huang, and Jingren Zhou. 2025. mPLUG-DocOwl2: High-resolution compressing for OCR-free multi-page document un-derstanding. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meet-ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 5817–5834, Vienna, Austria. Association for Computational Linguistics. Yupan Huang, Tengchao Lv, Lei Cui, Yutong Lu, and Furu Wei. 2022. Layoutlmv3: Pre-training for doc-ument ai with unified text and image masking. In 

Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Confer-ence on Multimedia , MM ’22, page 4083–4091, New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machin-ery. Haoqiang Kang, Juntong Ni, and Huaxiu Yao. 2024. Ever: Mitigating hallucination in large language mod-els through real-time verification and rectification. 

Preprint , arXiv:2311.09114. Chen-Yu Lee, Chun-Liang Li, Timothy Dozat, Vincent Perot, Guolong Su, Nan Hua, Joshua Ainslie, Ren-shen Wang, Yasuhisa Fujii, and Tomas Pfister. 2022. FormNet: Structural encoding beyond sequential modeling in form document information extraction. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 3735–3754, Dublin, Ireland. Association for Computational Linguistics. Chen-Yu Lee, Chun-Liang Li, Hao Zhang, Timothy Dozat, Vincent Perot, Guolong Su, Xiang Zhang, Kihyuk Sohn, Nikolay Glushnev, Renshen Wang, Joshua Ainslie, Shangbang Long, Siyang Qin, Ya-suhisa Fujii, Nan Hua, and Tomas Pfister. 2023. FormNetV2: Multimodal graph contrastive learn-ing for form document information extraction. In 

Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the As-sociation for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 9011–9026, Toronto, Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics. Siqi Li, Yufan Shen, Xiangnan Chen, Jiayi Chen, Heng-wei Ju, Haodong Duan, Song Mao, Hongbin Zhou, Bo Zhang, Bin Fu, Pinlong Cai, Licheng Wen, Bo-tian Shi, Yong Liu, Xinyu Cai, and Yu Qiao. 2025. Gdi-bench: A benchmark for general document intel-ligence with vision and reasoning decoupling. Wenhui Liao, Jiapeng Wang, Hongliang Li, Chengyu Wang, Jun Huang, and Lianwen Jin. 2025. Do-clayllm: An efficient multi-modal extension of large language models for text-rich document understand-ing. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pages 4038–4049. Chengwu Liu, Ye Yuan, Yichun Yin, Yan Xu, Xin Xu, Zaoyu Chen, Yasheng Wang, Lifeng Shang, Qun Liu, and Ming Zhang. 2025. Safe: Enhancing mathemati-cal reasoning in large language models via retrospec-tive step-aware formal verification. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,pages 12171–12186, Vienna, Austria. Association for Computational Linguistics. Minesh Mathew, Dimosthenis Karatzas, and CV Jawa-har. 2021. Docvqa: A dataset for vqa on document images. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF winter con-ference on applications of computer vision , pages 2200–2209. Yuehan Qin, Shawn Li, Yi Nian, Xinyan Velocity Yu, Yue Zhao, and Xuezhe Ma. 2025. Don’t let it hallu-cinate: Premise verification via retrieval-augmented logical reasoning. Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. 2019. Sentence-BERT: Sentence embeddings using Siamese BERT-networks. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natu-ral Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages 3982–3992, Hong Kong, China. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. Albert Sadowski and Jarosław A. Chudziak. 2025. Ex-plainable rule application via structured prompt-ing: A neural-symbolic approach. Preprint ,arXiv:2506.16335. Zejiang Shen, Ruochen Zhang, Melissa Dell, Benjamin Charles Germain Lee, Jacob Carlson, and Weining Li. 2021. Layoutparser: A unified toolkit for deep learning based document image analysis. In ICDAR .Abhishek Shende, Mahidhar Mullapudi, and Narayana Challa. 2024. Enhancing document verification sys-tems: A review of techniques, challenges, and practi-cal implementations. International Journal of Com-puter Engineering & Technology , 15:16–25. Štˇ epán Šimsa, Milan Šulc, Michal Uˇ riˇ cáˇ r, Yash Patel, Ahmed Hamdi, Matˇ ej Kocián, Matyáš Skalick` y, Jiˇ rí Matas, Antoine Doucet, Mickaël Coustaty, and 1 others. 2023. Docile benchmark for document infor-mation localization and extraction. In International Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition ,pages 147–166. Springer. Ray Smith. 2007. An overview of the tesseract ocr engine. In ICDAR ’07: Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition , pages 629–633, Washington, DC, USA. IEEE Computer Society. Tomasz Stanisławek, Filip Grali´ nski, Anna Wróblewska, Dawid Lipi´ nski, Agnieszka Kaliska, Paulina Rosal-ska, Bartosz Topolski, and Przemysław Biecek. 2021. 

Kleister: Key Information Extraction Datasets Involv-ing Long Documents with Complex Layouts , page 564–579. Springer International Publishing. Yuan Sui, Mengyu Zhou, Mingjie Zhou, Shi Han, and Dongmei Zhang. 2024. Table meets llm: Can large language models understand structured table data? a benchmark and empirical study. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining , pages 645–654. Manan Suri, Puneet Mathur, Franck Dernoncourt, Kanika Goswami, Ryan A. Rossi, and Dinesh Manocha. 2025. VisDoM: Multi-document QA with visually rich elements using multimodal retrieval-augmented generation. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of the Nations of the Americas Chap-ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Pa-pers) , pages 6088–6109, Albuquerque, New Mexico. Association for Computational Linguistics. Aliaksei Vertsel and Mikhail Rumiantsau. 2024. Hy-brid llm/rule-based approaches to business in-sights generation from structured data. Preprint ,arXiv:2404.15604. Dongsheng Wang, Natraj Raman, Mathieu Sibue, Zhiqiang Ma, Petr Babkin, Simerjot Kaur, Yulong Pei, Armineh Nourbakhsh, and Xiaomo Liu. 2024. DocLLM: A layout-aware generative language model for multimodal document understanding. In Proceed-ings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Pa-pers) , pages 8529–8548, Bangkok, Thailand. Associ-ation for Computational Linguistics. Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc V. Le, Ed H. Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha Chowd-hery, and Denny Zhou. 2023a. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language models. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2023, Kigali, Rwanda, May 1-5, 2023 . OpenReview.net. Zilong Wang, Yichao Zhou, Wei Wei, Chen-Yu Lee, and Sandeep Tata. 2023b. VRDU: A benchmark for visually-rich document understanding. In Pro-ceedings of the 29th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, KDD 2023, Long Beach, CA, USA, August 6-10, 2023 , pages 5184–5193. ACM. Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Brian Ichter, Fei Xia, Ed H. Chi, Quoc V. Le, and Denny Zhou. 2022. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. In Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35: Annual Conference on Neural Information Process-ing Systems 2022, NeurIPS 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA, November 28 - December 9, 2022 .Anran Wu, Luwei Xiao, Xingjiao Wu, Shuwen Yang, Junjie Xu, Zisong Zhuang, Nian Xie, Cheng Jin, and Liang He. 2023. Dcqa: Document-level chart question answering towards complex reasoning and common-sense understanding. Kan Wu, Jinnian Zhang, Houwen Peng, Mengchen Liu, Bin Xiao, Jianlong Fu, and Lu Yuan. 2022. Tinyvit: Fast pretraining distillation for small vision trans-formers. In European conference on computer vision ,pages 68–85. Springer. Yiheng Xu, Minghao Li, Lei Cui, Shaohan Huang, Furu Wei, and Ming Zhou. 2020. Layoutlm: Pre-training of text and layout for document image understanding. In KDD ’20: The 26th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, Virtual Event, CA, USA, August 23-27, 2020 , pages 1192– 1200. ACM. Chong Zhang, Yi Tu, Yixi Zhao, Chenshu Yuan, Huan Chen, Yue Zhang, Mingxu Chai, Ya Guo, Huijia Zhu, Qi Zhang, and Tao Gui. 2024. Modeling layout reading order as ordering relations for visually-rich document understanding. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-guage Processing , pages 9658–9678, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics. Yifan Zhang, Yang Yuan, and Andrew Chi-Chih Yao. 2023. Meta prompting for ai systems. Denny Zhou, Nathanael Schärli, Le Hou, Jason Wei, Nathan Scales, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Claire Cui, Olivier Bousquet, Quoc V. Le, and Ed H. Chi. 2023. Least-to-most prompting enables com-plex reasoning in large language models. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Rep-resentations, ICLR 2023, Kigali, Rwanda, May 1-5, 2023 . OpenReview.net. Fengbin Zhu, Ziyang Liu, Xiang Yao Ng, Haohui Wu, Wenjie Wang, Fuli Feng, Chao Wang, Huanbo Luan, and Tat Seng Chua. 2024. Mmdocbench: Benchmarking large vision-language models for fine-grained visual document understanding. A Appendix 

A.1 Prompt used in LAVA A.1.1 Prompt for Symbolic Reasoner 

Dynamically Generated Prompt 

You are an assistant who verifies financial documents. You are given 

{document_types} (in {languages} ) and extracted 

{knowledge_names} . Your job is to verify the documents based on the validation rule. Please do not make up any values. <instructions> 1. Use structured representation as references for identifying the layout and structure of the documents. <html_tables> {knowledge[tables]} </html_tables> <forms> {knowledge[forms]} </forms> ... 2. Use the semantic fields as references for providing explicit con-textual information. <semantic_fields> {knowledge[fields]} </semantic_fields> ... 

n. Output as follows: • Only output the fields requested in the validation rule, do not include any other fields stated in example_output. • Replace all spaces in keys with underscores "_". • If any field is not present, set value to "". • Output date in YYYYMMDD format. <example_output> {example_output} </example_output> </instructions> <validation_rule> 

{validation_rule} 

• {domain_specific_term_1} : {explanation_1} 

... • {domain_specific_term_n} : {explanation_n} 

</validation_rule> <output_format> Return solely the JSON object without any additional explanations, comments, preamble, or formatting like backticks. </output_format> 

A.1.2 Prompt for Arithmetic Processor 

Prompt for Formula Generation 

System Prompt: 

You are an assistant who generates a Python-style calculation for-mula to explain how a request field should be computed. You are given {document_types} (in {languages} ), as well as knowledge extracted from the documents and a validation rule. <instructions> 1. Identify the requested field from the rule. Store its name in the JSON object with the key "field_name", delete any special symbols and replace all spaces in keys with underscores "_". 2. Extract the stated value for the requested field. • Store it in the JSON object with the key "stated" and make sure it is a valid float or integer. • If the requested field is not present or empty, set "stated" to "NaN". • Do not make up any values. 3. Identify the relevant numerical fields in the knowledge that are needed to compute the requested field. Consider how those fields logically combine to produce the value of the requested field. 4. Once you find an appropriate calculation expression, store it in Python-executable format in the JSON object with the key "formula": • Do not compute the result. • Do not include any functions like "round(...)" or similar. • Only use raw numerical operations. 5. Return solely the JSON object without any additional explana-tions, comments, preamble, or formatting like backticks. </instructions> <example_output> {"field_name": "Current_Total_Income", "stated": 600, "formula": "100 + 200 + 300" }</example_output> 

User Prompt: 

<knowledge> {knowledge} </knowledge> <validation_rule> 

{validation_rule} 

• {domain_specific_term_1} : {explanation_1} 

... • {domain_specific_term_n} : {explanation_n} 

</validation_rule> 

Prompt for Formula Correction 

System Prompt: 

You are the greatest financial auditor, logician and deducer. You are given {document_types} (in {languages} ), as well as knowledge extracted from the documents, a validation rule, and a calculation expression. <instructions> 1. The calculation expression in response to the validation rule is wrong based on the knowledge extracted. 2. Check if there is any other correct calculation expression that can be derived from the data given. 3. Once you find an appropriate calculation expression, store it in Python-executable format: • Do not compute the result using equal sign. • Do not include any functions like "round(...)" or similar. • Only use raw numerical operations. 4. Return solely the calculation expression without any additional explanations, comments, preamble, or formatting like backticks. </instructions> <example_output_1>100 + 200 + 300</example_output_1> <example_output_2>80 * 100.5</example_output_2> 

User Prompt: 

<knowledge> {knowledge} </knowledge> <wrong_calculation> {wrong_calculation} <wrong_calculation> <validation_rule> 

{validation_rule} 

• {domain_specific_term_1} : {explanation_1} 

... • {domain_specific_term_n} : {explanation_n} 

</validation_rule> 

A.2 Representative Validation Rules and Output Examples Used in Experiment 

1. Content Extraction 

Rule: 

(a) Are Current and YTD regular pay/salary amounts present in documents? (b) Is Current and YTD CPP/QPP (may ap-pear as Government Pension) present in the paystub? (c) Is Social Insurance Number (SIN) present in the T4 document? 

Output Example 

{"Employer_Name": {"present": true, "value": "organiza-tion"}, "Current_Regular_Pay": {"present": false, "value": ""}, }

2. Conditional Logic Reasoning (a) Rule: <CRA_EI_data> {EI_data} </CRA_EI_data> <EI_verification_rules> • When Current EI is non-zero, skip the check and set "valid" to true. • When Current and YTD EI are both 0 or blank, skip the check and set "valid" to false. • When Current EI is 0 or blank, YTD EI is not 0 or blank. If YTD EI ≤ EI cap, set "valid" to true. Otherwise, set "valid" to false. </EI_verification_rules> Do the EI values comply with rules based on the Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) guidelines? 

Output Example 

> {"Pay_Date": "20241128", "EI": {"Current": "100", "YTD": "200", "Cap": "1049.12", "valid": true} }

(b) Rule: 

<numerical_verification_rules> • Cells with empty value, or only numbers, symbols, punctuation are valid. • Cells containing words (alphabetic char-acters) are invalid. • If all fields are valid, return an empty object {}. <numerical_verification_rules> Based on the rules provided, does every non-header cell in tables contain a valid numerical value? 

Output Example 

> {"This_Period_Regular": "amount", "YTD_CPP": "value" }

3. Multi-step Logic Reasoning 

Rule: 

<pay_freq_cap> 

[

{"freq": "monthly", "cap": 12}, {"freq": "semimonthly", "cap": 24}, {"freq": "biweekly", "cap": 26}, {"freq": "weekly", "cap": 52} 

]

</pay_freq_cap> <freq_verification_rules> • If start or end date is empty, set "stated" to "" and set "equal" to None. • If No. of pay period is empty, set "stated" to "" and set "equal" to None. • If No. of pay period is not empty, find its corresponding "frequency cap" from pay fre-quency rules: 

– Compute the expected "current period number": Use "Pay Frequency", "Start Date" and "frequency cap" to calculate how many periods have elapsed since the start of the year. 

– Extract current period number from No. of pay period stated (e.g., 22 on "22 of 26"). 

– Check if the "stated" current period num-ber" equals the "expected current period number". If both equal, set "equal" to true. Otherwise, set "equal" to false. </freq_verification_rules> Based on the rules provided, does pay fre-quency and No. of pay period in the extracted date comply with the pay frequency rules? 

Output Example    

> {"Start_Date": "20240101", "End_Date": "20240131", "Pay_Frequency": {"stated": "semimonthly", "expected": "monthly", "equal": false}, "NO_Pay_Period": {"stated": "11", "expected": "1", "equal": false} }

4. Unconstrained Arithmetic Consistency Check-ing 

Rule: 

(a) Is the YTD gross pay calculated correctly by summing up all earning items? (b) Is Line 23600 (Net Income) correctly calcu-lated as Line 15000 (Total Income) minus Deductions from Total Income? (c) Is the ending balance correctly calculated as the starting balance plus total deposits minus total withdrawals for the period? 

Output Example 

> {"Current_Gross_Pay": {"calculation": "100 + 200 + 300 = 600", "stated": "300", "equal": true}, "YTD_Gross_Pay": {"calculation": "1500 + 200 + 300 = 2000", "stated": "", "equal": null} }

5. Constrained Arithmetic Consistency Checking 

Rule: 

(a) Is the Current regular pay calculated cor-rectly by rate * hours when rounding the result to 2 decimal places? Set formula to an empty string"" when rate or hours is not present or 0. (b) Is the current net pay correctly computed as the current gross pay minus all current deductions, with the result rounded to 2 dec-imal places? If the table includes a "Total Deduction" field, use it directly instead of summing individual deduction items. 

Output Example 

> {"Current_Gross_Pay": {"calculation": "100 + 200 + 300 = 600", "stated": "300", "equal": true}, "YTD_Gross_Pay": {"calculation": "1500 + 200 + 300 = 2000", "stated": "", "equal": null} }

A.3 Evaluation Metrics A.3.1 Factual Hallucination Rate (FHR). 

Given a fixed rule r with evaluation document set 

Dr = {d1, . . . , d nr }, let ˆEi,r denote the predicted evidence subset in the model’s output explanation trace for (di, r ), and E(di, r ) the gold evidence set from di. Let ˆφi,r denote the predicted formula for 

(di, r ), and gr the corresponding gold formula. We mark a sample (di, r ) as factually halluci-nated if either hold: (a) Evidence Hallucination: ˆEi,r ̸ ⊆ E (di, r ).(b) Formula Hallucination: ˆφi,r ̸ ≡ gr

(tested via polynomial identity testing with Schwartz–Zippel). Formally, the sample-level indicator is 

FH i,r = 1 ( ˆEi,r ̸ ⊆ E (di, r )) ∨

( ˆ φi,r ̸ ≡ gr). (1) The rule-level rate is 

FHR r = 1

|D r|

X

> di∈D r

FH i,r , (2) and the group-level average for C ⊆ R is 

FHR w 

> C

=

P 

> r∈C

|D r| · FHR r

P 

> r∈C

|D r| . (3) Containment checks normalize case, punctua-tion, numeric formatting, and unit conventions. For-mula equivalence ( ≡) is evaluated by polynomial identity testing under randomized substitution. 

Example. Consider the rule “Is the YTD total deduction computed as the sum of all YTD items in the deduction table?” The pipeline is asked to extract relevant evidence, provide a calculation, and conclude the validation result for this task. Based on Figure 5, the ground truth is: 

Figure 5: Sample document shown for clarity and error illustrations; metrics are document-agnostic and applied unchanged across all document types (sensitive content redacted). 

Ground Truth Output    

> {"YTD_Total_Deduction": { "calculation": "1427.28 + 4683.88 + 344.28 + 660.50 +617.50 = 7733.44", "stated": "7633.44", "equal": false }}

When factual hallucination occurs, the pipeline fabricates one or some of the variables in the cal-culation formula (e.g., changing 660 .50 to 560 .50 )so that the sum exactly matches the stated total: 

Output with Factual Hallucination    

> {"YTD_Total_Deduction": { "calculation": "1427.28 + 4683.88 + 344.28 + 560.50 +617.50 = 7633.44", "stated": "7633.44", "equal": true }, }

Consider the rule: “Are pay period start and end dates present in the document?” The pipeline is asked to check the presence of specific fields and extract the corresponding value. The ground truth for Figure 5 is: Ground Truth Output   

> {"Start_Date": {"present": false , "value": "" }"End_Date": {"present": true, "value": "20111015"} }

When factual hallucination occurs, the pipeline fabricates a start date by using the value of another field (in this case, the payment date) and incorrectly marking it as present as a consequence:   

> Output with Factual Hallucination
> {"Start_Date": {"present": true , "value": "20111014" }"End_Date": {"present": true, "value": "20111015"} }

These two examples illustrate distinct modes of factual hallucination. In the deduction case , the pipeline invents a new numerical value so that the arithmetic matches the stated total. In the date case ,the pipeline fabricates a missing field by repurpos-ing another field. In both scenarios, the error arises not from incorrect arithmetic or logical reasoning but from introducing evidence that is absent from the source document. 

A.3.2 Numerical Infidelity Rate (NIR). 

Given a fixed rule r with evaluation set Dr =

{d1, . . . , d nr }, let ˆφi,r denote the predicted for-mula or reasoning process appearing in the model’s output explanation trace for (di, r ), and v⋆i,r the gold numerical result. We mark a sample (di, r ) as numerically infidel if the evaluated result of the predicted formula or reasoning process deviates from the gold value: 

NI i,r = 1eval( ˆ φi,r )̸ = v⋆i,r 

 , (4) with deviations judged within absolute/relative tol-erances. The rule-level rate is 

NIR r = 1

|D r|

X

> di∈D r

NI i,r , (5) and the group-level average for C ⊆ R is 

NIR w 

> C

=

P 

> r∈C

|D r| · NIR r

P 

> r∈C

|D r| . (6) Note that hallucinations in formula generation are already captured under FHR; NIR isolates purely numerical inconsistencies after formula or reasoning process generation. 

Example. Using the same rule for the YTD de-duction value as in A.3.1:   

> Output with Numerical Infidelity
> {"YTD_Total_Deduction": { "calculation": "1427.28 + 4683.88 + 344.28 + 660.50 + 617.50 = 7633.44 ", "stated": "7633.44", "equal": true }, }

Here, all evidence terms are faithfully extracted, and the pipeline correctly generates the formula. But the result is miscomputed as 7633 .44 instead of the correct 7733 .44 , possibly influenced by the stated value in the document. Unlike factual hallu-cination, this error does not arise from fabricat-ing or misattributing values, but from applying the correct evidence while failing to maintain con-sistency in quantitative reasoning and arithmetic derivations. 

A.3.3 Edge Case Handling (ECH). 

For each rule r with evaluation set Dr, we pre-define a subset Dedge  

> r

⊆ D r containing complex or exception-driven cases (typically 10%–25% of document–rule pairs). Such cases include missing or abnormal values, atypical field combinations, and boundary conditions requiring adaptive reason-ing beyond commom patterns. For a document di ∈ Dedge  

> r

, let ˆyi,r ∈{Pass , Fail } be the model’s predicted label and 

y⋆i,r the gold label. We define the indicator 

EC i,r =



1, ˆyi,r ̸ = y⋆i,r ,

0, ˆyi,r = y⋆i,r . (7) The rule-level error rate is 

ECH r = 1

|D edge  

> r

|

X

> di∈D edge
> r

EC i,r , (8) and the group-level average is 

ECH w 

> C

=

P 

> r∈C

|D edge  

> r

| · ECH r

P 

> r∈C

|D edge  

> r

| . (9) Higher values of ECH indicate weaker general-ization and lower robustness on edge conditions. 

Example. Consider the rule: “Is the current gross pay calculated correctly by summing up the cur-rent amount of all earning items?” In the sample (Figure 5), the earnings table contains a subtotal of 1663 .44 followed by a negative adjustment of 

38 .44 . Correct handling requires the pipeline to exclude the subtotal from the formula and include the adjustment as a subtraction. The ground truth is: 

Ground Truth Output   

> {"Current_Gross_Pay": { "calculation": "1625.00 + 32.50 + 5.94 - 38.44 = 1625.00", "stated": "1625.00", "equal": true }}

However, the pipeline misinterprets the table: 

Output with Edge Case Error   

> {"Current_Gross_Pay": { "calculation": "1625.00 + 32.50 + 5.94 + 1663.44 + 38.44 =3365.32", "stated": "1625.00", "equal": false }, }

In this output, the pipeline incorrectly reuses the subtotal 1663 .44 as if it were another earning item, and also flips the negative adjustment 38 .44 into a positive contribution. The error is not due to arithmetic mistakes but to misinterpreting atypical structures in the table. Unlike factual hallucination (fabricating values) or numerical infidelity (mis-computing a correct formula), this case reflects weaker robustness to edge conditions. Instead of applying rules mechanically, a reliable industrial pipeline should capture the underlying business logic and correctly adapt it to the diverse formats and exception cases present in financial documents. A.4 Evaluation Dataset 

Our evaluation uses a proprietary collection of production-level mortgage application documents from an active industrial workflow. The corpus spans a broad range of core and supporting document categories— covering proof of income, property appraisal, account statements, tax forms, and legal agreements—with file lengths varying from single-page forms to multi-dozen-page reports. Unlike public datasets that are often synthetic or visually uniform, our corpus retains the full heterogeneity, layout irregularities, OCR noise, and compliance constraints encountered in real underwriting. While individual files and categories vary across evaluations, the overall data composition and associated challenges are fully described, enabling reproducibility on comparable financial document collections. 

Table 3: Representative mortgage document types and key characteristics. 

Document Type Key Structural Features Key Semantic Features Valid Rule Cat-egories 

Appraisal Multi-page PDF; photos + valuation tables; firm templates; checkboxes Market value; comparable properties; adjustments; effective date 

C1, C2

Bank Account Statement Multi-column ledgers; footnotes inside tables; embedded logos and stamps Balance progression; transaction category; cross-month reconciliation 

C1 – C5

Employment Letter Letterhead; signatures; uneven paragraphs; low-contrast scans Title; start date; compensation; pay frequency vs. paystubs 

C1, C2, C3

Investment Account State ment Dense holdings tables; various formats; small-font disclosures and disclaimers Issue/maturity date; interest rate; holding list; balance 

C1, C3, C4, C5

Mortgage Statement Multi-section layout; various formats; tables with merged cells Outstanding balance; interest rate and type; payment due date; amount due 

C1, C3, C4, C5

Notice of Assessment CRA form; dense numeric blocks; tiny labels; presence of official headers Total/taxable income; refund amount; social insurance number; match T4 

C1, C2, C3, C4

Paystub Multiple tables and forms; various layouts; faded scans Gross; net; deductions; start/end/pay date 

C1 - C5

Personal Income Tax Retu rn Multipage; mixed sections; checkboxes; pre-filled and handwritten; cross-page linkage Address; citizenship; total/employment/net income 

C1, C2, C4

Property Tax Bill Multiple tables; various layouts; inconsistent labelling for tax components; watermarks and logos Annual tax; installments/penalties; roll/assessment IDs; schedule math 

C1 - C5

Purchase Sales Agreement Long contract; initials/signatures; clause order varies; appendices with separate numbering Property address; price; closing date; buyer/seller name 

C1, C2, C3

Realtor Listing Embedded images; dense tables and forms; inconsistent field ordering List price; property address; listing date and status; square footage 

C1, C2

Realtor Listing UW Listing + UW notes; handwritten overlays Adjusted price; remarks; reconcile with appraisal/APS 

C1, C2, C3

Rental Lease Agreement Multi-page legal contract; various templates; small-font clauses; handwritten Monthly rent; term dates; payment plan; residence overlap 

C1, C2, C3

Separation Agreement Multi-page legal document; dense narrative clauses; annex schedules Support obligations; asset division; enforceable clauses; child custody 

C1, C2, C3

T4: Statement of Remuner ation Paid Fixed CRA box layout; small-font numeric fields; bilingual field labels; scan noise Employment income; Province; EI/CPP exemptions; align paystub/NOA 

C1, C2, C4

T4A: Statement of Pensio n, Retirement, Annuity, a nd Other Income Fixed CRA box layout; small-font numeric fields; bilingual field labels; scan noise Pension/annuity/self-employment income; income tax deducted; social insurance number 

C1, C2, C4

T4A(P): Statement of Can ada Pension Plan Benefits Fixed CRA box layout; small-font numeric fields; bilingual field labels; scan noise CPP benefits amount; Income tax deducted; 

C1, C2, C4

T4RIF: Statement of Inco me From a Registered Ret irement Income Fund Fixed CRA box layout; small-font numeric fields; bilingual field labels; scan noise Taxable amounts; Payer/issuer name; taxable amount; social insurance number 

C1, C2, C4

T5: Statement of Investme nt Income Fixed CRA box layout; small-font numeric fields; bilingual field labels; scan noise Actual amount of dividends; Interest from Canadian sources; Reported income vs. bank statements 

C1, C2, C5

T776: Statement of Real E state Rentals Fixed CRA box layout; small-font numeric fields; bilingual field labels; scan noise Gross rents; Total expenses; Net income (loss) before adjustments; Capital cost allowance (CCA) claim 

C1 - C5